Penrose’s: The Road to Reality -  A Page by Page analysis.


I do not claim to be a great mathematician yet I want to understand Roger Penrose, who seems to be one of the greatest that have lived to date. Not great in that he has discovered anything new, although he did help develop twistor theory. I think Penrose is great because he shares his love for mathematics in a way that attempts to deepen every person’s understanding of the “Platonic Realm”. He may use difficult annotations to teach complex concepts, but he genuinely believes that others can understand the concepts as well as he does. For this he is a great teacher. I think that humanity’s perception of the world could improve even if just a handful of people can understand what Penrose writes in his book, The Road to Reality. This is my attempt to understand Penrose’s mind through this book thereby arduously moving my internal representation of reality closer to the truth. 


I have tried and failed in the past to understand this book. I will not accept failure as a conclusion to this study. The path to understanding this book is long and I plan on traveling  it slowly. I may need to sit down and learn new mathematical concepts for a very long time before I can understand some of the pages of this book, yet even If it takes me my entire life to understand this book then so be it. I will document my journey through this book with a page by page analysis where I expect to move no faster than a page a day. At that rate it will take 2.9 years to complete this analysis and that pace might not even be maintainable.  One thing is certain though: I will open the book daily and I will write daily on any new progress I make. This is one of the most important things I think I could do with my life. This is almost more important than my robotics endeavour. So let me begin:


P1: Prologue - “The Sun had never risen before in the North” That sun which Penrose describes is that of a volcano bursting from the ground. The “ominous sounding rumblings” would sound quite unfamiliar to an ancient. They would not have had the experience to understand a volcano. Surely without cameras and helicopters, most that had the pleasure of witnessing such a powerful event would also have the displeasure of being vaporized by it. “Never before had he witnessed a God’s anger of such magnitude”. This passage serves as a juxtaposition between the understanding of today and ancient humanity. Am-tep might not understand what the glowing red “monstrous creature from Hell” is, but he most certainly attributes the volcano to the consequence of a God’s anger. How could it be any other way to a person with Am-Teps frame of understanding. How wrong could my own understanding of modern wonders be. Let’s assume the magnitude of difference in Am-Tep’s internal model of the world compared to my modern understanding is Am_Col_dist and lets also assume that Col_future_dist is the magnitude of difference in my own perception of reality compared to what scientists will understand about the world 2000 years from now. Could Col_future_dist be greater than Am_Col_dist? If so, how much could reading this book close that gap? I feel as though no one is doing an in depth analysis of Penrose. I believe many think and feel that Penrose is either out of their league or not worth understanding. He has an understanding of mathematics that has literally taken a lifetime to develop. Despite my inadequacy, I know that if Penrose is willing to show me a road leading to a better understanding of reality, I should take it no matter how difficult. I do not know how many people are on this particular road, but I will certainly do my best to keep walking down it, because I don’t want to be like Am-Tep and his volcano by watching a modern wonder unfold before my eyes while I pass it off as a Daemon from the underworld only to be vaporized by it. Luckily for Am-Tep, circumstances allowed him to survive the volcano blast along with his knowledge which eventually was passed down to Pythagoras. Lets not assume, I would have been as lucky.